Hello and welcome back to the course on Tablo.
And today we're talking about aggregations and granularity.
It's going to be a quite an important tutorial because the things that you'll learn today you will take
away and apply throughout this course and through out all of your work with Tablo because these things
govern how Tablo operates.
So let's get straight into it here we've got the chart and the chart that we've created and it's showing
us unemployment in the U.S. a month to month from 2005 to 2015.
Now the question that we have is how does Tablo know that we want to see it at the monthly level.
How does public know that this aggregation that is doing summing up the unemployed variable How does
it know that we want to see it at the month level how does it know that he needs to sum it up at the
month level.
So the answer is quite simple.
Tablo will always aggregate measures at the level of granularity of your worksheet.
So in this case because we have this variable here month of period Tablo knows that we are intending
to see all of this data that we plotting at the level of one month or at the granularity of a month.
And so what that means is if I remove this if I just drag it out of the dashboard or the worksheet you
will see one single dot.
So instead of lots of dots or a line Tablo has no.
Now tabel has no clue at which level granularity we want to see the worksheet and it assumes that we
just want to see it at the broadest level possible.
And that is at the level of the whole data set.
So it what it does is just sums up all of the values for this variable unemployed into one single value
and it plots it for you.
So I'm just going to control that and return month of period.
And so that's in this case month of period is the variable that governs granularity.
Normally what happens or quite like the concept behind Tablo is that measures get aggregated and dimensions
specify the level of granularity and we'll see how that works in a second.
In this case month of period even though it's recognized as a measure and it's green it is still the
variable that is specifying the level of granularity.
And that's because it introduces this access or a timeline at the bottom and it actually specifies that
we want to see it at the monthly level so it makes sense for Tablo to assume that we want to see this
chart at the level of particularity of a month.
So no what we can do to alter aggregation is we can go to analysis and we can actually switch it off.
So if you just check this box you'll see that you get this fuzzy chart and now we're just going to replace
it with a shape charge just to make it look better and you will see that now instead of aggregating
the data tablas just plodding unemployed.
So basically it's plotting every single row of our data set separately on this chart.
So you're going to have a lot of values for the same month in the same year and because because we have
two genders and we have a lot of different age groups.
And now if we look at the bottom we will see that there's a total of 1000 708 marks and that is the
total number of rows that we have in our data because our daughter is at monthly level.
So if we go back to our plus here which just going to switch aggregation back on and I'll show you another
way we can alter or aggregation.
Now what we can do is instead of switch aggregation off we can introduce a dimension which will change
the level of granularity of our dashboard and therefore it will affect the aggregation.
So we're going to take gender and we're going to drag it onto color and right away you can see here
that we have twice as many dots the blue dots for present mail and the orange dots represent female
unemployment for that specific month.
And now Tablo knows that because we have this variable here which is month of period and because we
have this dimension in our worksheet it knows that we want to see everything or we want to see all of
the measures aggregated at the level of granularity of month plus gender.
So if we look down here you'll see that this 244 marks that is twice as many marks as we had when we
had months so I'll just take gender out for a second and you'll see that we have 122 marks and so now
if we return gender back into color there is 244 marks and that is telling us that the level of granularity
has become even smaller or bigger actually.
So the chart has become more granular because we've been just as I mentioned what else can we do.
We can introduce more dimensions to increase granularity even further so let's take page and dragged
into shape.
So now you can see many more marks and you still see orange and blue orange represents gender and blue
order presents female and blue represent male.
But at the same time there's different shapes on the chart and other circles are squares as crosses
as pluses.
There's lots of different types of shapes and each shape represents a different group or a different
level kind of a different datapoint or a different point on our chart and tabel knows the level we want
to aggregate at because it can see all of the dimensions in a worksheet you can see that we have gender
or we can have age we have a month of period so it knows that this sum is now only had now has to be
calculated.
Having these this level of granular granularity in mind.
So that's how agregate that's how granularity works and aggregation works together of granularity granularity.
Let's have a look at different types of aggregations that are available.
So I'm just going to remove age so it's not too cluttered.
And now we're going to look at is not some of unemployed we're actually going to change it.
And if you click this drop down and go down to measure some here you can change what you want to see.
So let's say you want to see the average unemployment for that month.
If you click that you'll see the chart didn't change much but that access actually changed.
So when you had some it was the total unemployment for that gender for that month.
Now if you click measure average you will see that it is the average unemployment for that gender for
that month.
There's another one let's look at say median.
See now the chart changes because it's actually showing us and the access changes as well.
But now it's not proportional because it's media.
And now we can see that these marks are presenting the medium median unemployment at the level of granularity
of this worksheet and that level of granularity is month plus gender.
And so basically that's how granularity and aggregation work.
The only one more thing that I wanted to show you and this is important is detail.
So sometimes you might want to increase your level of granularity you want to make your dashboard more
detailed or more granular but you don't want to drag anything onto your eye color or shape you don't
want to affect the visual like coloring or other parts of the dashboard but you do want to increase
the level of granularity.
Will Tablo has a solution for that.
There is this option detail in detail doesn't actually mean like detail as an words or description.
It actually means that level of granularity of the chart.
So let's do that let's take a page and instead of dragging it on to shape like we did last time let's
put it on to detail and see what happens.
Now you can see that the shapes haven't changed but the granularity of the chart has changed.
So basically this is an option for you to add dimensions and measures to your dashboard without actually
affecting the visual representation.
But affecting the level of granularity and that's exactly why that is but in detail all this option
detail is here is for you to control at which level the aggregation is going to happen.
So just remember about that because we will be using that going further in the course and you will definitely
find it helpful and handy when you're doing your own projects for work or at home.
So that's all for today.
I hope that was helpful.
And let me know if you have any questions whatsoever because these are important topics that we will
need going forward.
And in the next Tauriel we will start creating this awesome looking dashboard for unemployment worksheet
for important worksheet.
Diasporas will come.
All right.
Look for it.
See you next time.
And until then happy analyzing.